this video is brought to you by my
patrons if you'd like to support my
channel and get access to extras like
audio commentaries a patron exclusive
podcast and uncut videos you can join by
clicking the link in the description
the bulk of content on this channel is
about queer representation and because
as i have mentioned numerous times the
walt disney corporation is playing a
ruthless cutthroat game of being the
world's number one producer of media in
general
my ire is naturally drawn to
that believe it or not i'd really like
to not talk about disney so often i'd
love to make more videos about
representation that doesn't suck i would
like to be able to celebrate what we
could have and do have
instead i spend most of the time
explaining how it's okay to ask for more
than the flaky lean in queerness that
we've all been gaslid into praising but
the problem with a dwindling number of
large studios capable of juggling the
kind of budgets you need for multimedia
productions is that there are too few
cooks in the kitchen
fewer cooks mean the menu gets slashed
and we don't have anyone else to go to
if we don't like what we're being served
so we end up groveling at the feet of
these studio executives and believe them
when they say they're doing the best
that they can and then putting them on
these pedestals when they roll out the
bare minimum if we weren't living in
such a monopolistic world we wouldn't
have to talk about disney we could just
let the free market do its thing and
give other studios a chance to corner
the market on all ages queer content
queer inclusive blockbusters queer
characters and genre films or even
lighthearted adult-oriented queer
content that isn't about a
reductionalist display of pathos and
suffering as the sole defining element
of queer validity but in spite of
disney's obsession with cow towing to
its own brand like that's the anthill
that it's going to die on there are a
few times they have given the gays
everything they want and while i was
making content about disney's
shortcomings on representation i was
informed that the owl house the 2020
animated series on the disney channel
absolved disney of all the queerbaiting
queer phobia that i was accusing them of
and even when i wasn't talking about
disney at all i was reminded of the owl
house over
and over and over and over and so i
watched it
go me i guess i really wasn't ever
expecting to hate it
i just wasn't watching it because
i'm an only child which means when
someone tells me to do something i don't
do it just because i don't like being
told what to do i was probably going to
end up watching it in the end eventually
probably would have waited for a third
season so i could properly binge it but
disney decided to be a big old dick and
soft cancel the show by cutting the
final season down from the 19 to 21
episodes
to three
and this cancellation came in spite of
the show's growing fan base and
increasing word of mouth popularity the
only reason i know about the existence
of the owl house is due entirely to
people talking about it not a single
disney
ad and there isn't much that manages to
slip past me on social media these days
so disney managed to produce media which
was openly queer kid-friendly adult
accessible and which the gays didn't
really have a problem with
and didn't really stir up much of a
controversy from queer opposition which
seems to be exactly the kind of kickback
they're hoping to accomplish every time
they throw a variable lesbian into a
pixar movie or a sassy gay-coded
sidekick into a live-action remake and
every time they try that
they basically project headlines to the
moon to let everyone know about it and
every time we come away feeling unseen
and every time they promised next time
is when they're actually going to give
us the real first queer character all
the while leaks out of pixar indicate
that all that queer coding we've been
reading into
we're actually once intended to be a
part of the picture and yet the mouse
left it on the cutting room floor yet
when they got exactly what they seemed
to be looking for with the owl house
they tore it down
so time to conduct a psychological
assessment on a corporation to
attempt
to figure out
what could possibly be going on in there
[Music]
the owl house was approved for a second
season in 2019 before it even premiered
this kind of two-season safety net no
doubt helped contribute to the writer's
confidence in brazenly depicting queer
identities and media directed toward a
juvenile audience and even though season
one only really served up some gay dads
background gay prom dates and strong
overtones of lesbian panic that must
have been a bit too queer for disney i
say only because it really is the least
a piece of media can do to represent us
but it still leaks above what most media
offers should we be grateful for getting
offered a sip of water after a week in
the desert hmm so what's going on in the
owl house well the titular residence
itself is a sentient building which is
or is not
controlled by hoodie
who is a sentient door doorbell doorman
door knocker security system and best
friend the primary resident eda is an
incredibly powerful witch swindler an
all-around miscreant who is wanted by
the law because she refuses to conform
to an arbitrary standard of rules and
guidelines she lives with a strange
adorable dog demon first named king last
name of demons he may be a pet or a
roommate or an adopted child ida makes
her living off the grid by using an
interdimensional portal to snag garbage
from the human world to pawn off to
magical residents of the boiling isles
as novelties and one day a piece of
garbage named luz wanders through lose
is a people not garbage that that was a
joke people aren't garbage most people
aren't garbage lose is a girl who has
her head if it's not in the clouds it's
somewhere else she's a little bit not
like the other girls to the point where
her mother decides she needs to be
shipped off to a special secluded summer
camp that will teach her how to be
normal it's not analogous for a certain
kind of therapy camp at all i swear
instead she chases ita's staff owl
through a briefcase portal into the
boiling isles a magical place horrible
place creator dana terrace's direct
inspiration was narnia imagined by
herronius bach the whole of the isles
are the corpse of a long dead titan
because the titan was magical all life
evolved on the islands to use this magic
and it's mostly unpleasant
yeah we don't have weather we have
plagues luz decides she would rather
stay here and learn to be a witch from
eda instead of going back home where she
would have to be in a summer camp where
she'd be shoved into a neatly labeled
box which would deterministically
establish how she can contribute to
normal society
and if lose is going to get labeled
she's going to put that label on herself
damn it humans do not typically live on
the boiling isles however though the
residents know of humans and though the
sum of human monsters and myths come
from the boiling isles there is quite a
hubbub about a human living there did
you know that humans now barbed wire to
their kids teeth but why
maybe to make them magnetic
all things on the boiling isles can use
magic to an extent but as humans have
not evolved here they lack the
physiological organs needed to use it
luz however manages to figure out a way
to make magic out of glyphs and joins a
magic school much to the dismay of eda
who loathes conformity there are some
very clear parallels between eda and luz
and the boiling isles can be seen as a
microcosm of our social culture of
conformity all witches by mandate must
join a coven and when they join a coven
they are branded and their access to
magic is limited to only the single type
of magic the coven represents ita
refuses to limit her potential priding
herself on being the strongest witch on
the isles and she looks down on the
witches who conformed to these covens
they ida claims are choosing to limit
their own potential for the sole purpose
of keeping up social conventions chaotic
pansexual energy for the win and there
are punishments social and legislative
for non-conformity especially for those
who refuse to relegate themselves only
one label of identity i mean magic the
real plot of the series revolves around
the topic of expression and identity the
primary villain of the series enforces
this coven hegemony strictly and with an
iron fist emperor bellows the only coven
which is permitted to practice all forms
of magic is the emperor's coven
where he recruits witches whose
unbridled talent he needs to enforce his
will but who he can still control with
promises of his favor eda represents the
most dangerous threat to his
totalitarian rule an exceptional witch
who does not need him to be as powerful
as she is non-conformity is tolerable to
authority when insignificant
but those who are exceptional can
challenge authoritarian rhetoric while
emperor belos's plots and centuries-old
schemes are the underlying narrative of
the show the bulk of each episode
features lew's going on magical
coming-of-age adventures frequently
featuring her friends willow and gus and
then later amity who was once a rival
and later a girlfriend with an actual
animated gay kiss
towards the end of the second season yes
but there is a great deal of
hand-holding and cheek smooching leading
up to that true to form these girls who
like girls spend a great deal of time
doubting whether the girl who is
displaying obvious signs of affection
actually likes them and after they
started dating both luz and amity
vocalized the word girlfriend
about
once each episode which while gratuitous
is a great way to remind the audience
that they are in fact girlfriends
because in spite of the blushing the
dancing the hand-holding the gay panic
there was a contingent of the audience
that still felt that the pairing
came out of nowhere and even though the
show chooses to depict queerness
textually it also goes out of its way to
continue including subtextual queerness
too to me this is clear in the character
designs themselves look closely and you
may spot a number of lgbtq flags in the
show not being flown from flagpoles or
hung up in the windows however lose's
primary design seems to sample colors
from the asexual flag which alternately
may be sampling from the demisexual
colors however with the addition of her
cloak she wears bisexual colors eda's
sister lilith vaguely resembles the
asexual flag at least in season one
however she was also described as arrow
ace by people working on the show
looking at king i always felt that his
eye colors were a weird choice there
could have been lots of ways to make his
eyes pop but this seemed weirdly
specific if we're following this pattern
of flag colors though his eyes
themselves resemble the intersex flag or
his color scheme as a whole matches the
non-binary flag and furthermore amity's
hair color change bears a resemblance to
the genderqueer flag this may be a bit
of a stretch given that there is a they
them character on the show eat his ex
reign whom all characters automatically
default to their chosen pronouns the
flag colors are likely nothing more than
a nod that contributes to the overlying
queerness of the show as a whole maybe
on a dare someone told dana that they
can't possibly use the queer flags as a
color palette for an entire animated
series because even if they aren't
strictly written as queer the show does
tend to lean on queer flags for palettes
for instance eda's color palette seems
to be sampled from the lesbian flag
she's not a lesbian herself she
references a train of ex-boyfriends but
i bet if you asked her how she
identified she'd just say i'm eda the
owl lady the most powerful witch on the
boiling aisles i mean she does kind of
have these rogue queer aunt vibes right
the kind who's late to family functions
who's the subject of family gossip who
somehow always manages to land on her
feet and who hides things in her hair
the kind who you feel safe asking if she
can hook you up with a fake id and will
not only deliver but take you to your
first bar some of us are lucky enough to
know her so yes the owl house is very
unafraid to brazenly depict queerness
while at the same time
leaning on queer coding and unspoken
queerness to indicate that the boiling
isles are much more lenient when it
comes to sexual and gender identities
this is a world after all where people
belong to various categories of demons
some of whom do not appear to have any
gender traits in a world where there are
sentient tentacle monsters chest-faced
centaurs and tenelonoza it would make
sense that getting upset about pronouns
wouldn't have a place in common
discourse however what helps the owl
house rise above being just a cartoon
about queer people is that it also
offers additional commentary about a
queer state of affairs how luz escapes
from one system of oppression and learns
that this world of magical freedom has a
system of oppression all its own and for
this the owl house takes an increasingly
anti-establishment stance
which is not directed at singular jerks
but rather discusses root causes of
societal oppression as a whole but is
this anti-establishment sentiment why
disney a massive corporation with weird
internal rules and cultural standards
canceled the show
likely not
because just be yourself has been the
media mantra of disney since the
renaissance in the 90s so if the owl
house has broad strokes messaging that
matches the disney brand and if it has
animation and design that matches the
disney brand and if it has an array of
characters and presented themes about
family values that match the disney
brand and if aside from that the show
boasts stellar ratings and prestige
which very much cements the disney brand
as presenting excellence in children's
media then why on earth did they cancel
it who knows why who could ever know
we know
[Music]
generally disney channel animated shows
tend to run for fewer seasons when
compared to their network counterparts
look at adventure time and steven
universe which clocked in at 283 and 160
episodes respectively and compare them
to popular disney channel shows like
gravity falls 41 episodes and star vs
the forces of evil 77 episodes once upon
a time disney even had the 65 episode
rule where no animated show on the
disney channel could go past 65 episodes
it's an outdated business practice that
disney clung onto a lot longer than most
producers with 65 episodes one episode
could be broadcast each weekday reaching
the 65th episode at the end of the 13th
week 13 weeks is one quarter of a year
four 65 episode shows can be broadcast
in a single calendar year in the same
time slot it took shows like gargoyles
and ducktales to end that trend but that
doesn't mean disney doesn't use bullcrap
reasons to cancel shows today terrace
previously offered some insight into why
the owl house wasn't renewed for a full
third season which boiled down to a
frustratingly simple reason
that had nothing to do with reviews all
good or viewership also good someone
decided
that the show didn't fit
disney's brand
they just wanted to be done with the owl
house and this was the perfect chance to
do that
even getting the consolation season 3
episodes was difficult apparently
hard to say i wasn't allowed to be part
of any conversation until i was just
told at the end of the day there are a
few business people who oversee what
fits into the disney brand and one day
one of those guides decided the owl
house just didn't fit that brand the
story is serialized barely compared to
any average anime lmao our audience
skews older and that just didn't fit
this one guy's tastes that's it ain't
that wild really grinds my guts boils my
brains kicks my shins and all the things
it sucks but it is what it is while we
have had issues airing in a few
countries and are just straight up
banned and a few more i'm not gonna
assume bad faith against the people i
work with in l.a don't worry dana
i'll assume the bad faith for you so it
was one guy's taste one guy
one guy who could be that one guy who
could that one guy be though not
officially confirmed i'm willing to bet
it's
this guy bob chapic the current ceo of
the walt disney company who earlier this
year made a name for himself by not
speaking out about florida's don't say
gay bill until it was too late to do
anything about it
and was infamously forcing disney and
pixar filmmakers to cut queer content
from their films chabick made his name
in the company by running the disney
parks many feel he ran them into the
ground disenchantment with the parks
from die hard disney lovers has been
at an all-time high ever since he got
control of the parks let alone the
company massive price increases in
everything from food to ticket prices to
accommodations have made a disney
vacation more difficult to afford than
ever to the point where a suite at the
disneyland hotel
costs more than staying at the palace of
versailles in france at the same time
the company has eliminated perks like
the formerly free magical express
transportation to and from walt disney
world from the orlando airport genie
plus has made standby lines regularly
exceed an hour for rides that used to
average 15 minutes even bob iger the
former disney ceo and the man who
hand-picked jay pick has had regrets
several disney sources and people who
are familiar with iger's thinking have
indicated that iger has spent the time
since announcing chapic as his successor
regretting what he has called one of his
worst business decisions according to a
former disney executive iger has said
that he didn't realize chapick was such
a novice when it came to handling
complex issues like talent management
and political battles and that chapic
was arrogant and uninterested in other
people's opinions he's also not fond of
the fact that chapic is a crypto
enthusiast who wants nfts to become
particularly important parts of disney
going forward he's even started
consulting with warner brothers on how
to rebuild the dc eu
that's how much he wants chapic to fail
chapic has also come under harsh
criticism for treatment of cast members
that's what disney calls park employees
many full-time park employees struggle
to provide food and basic necessities
for their families earlier this year
abigail disney grand niece of walt
disney and granddaughter of company
co-founder roy disney released a
documentary about the walt disney
company's obligation to do better for
its employees which you'd think would
have got on chapic's nerves but at least
in public he seemed unfazed profit has
been his main defense he took over as
ceo of the company on february 25th 2020
as the pandemic was just starting to be
taken seriously as a significant global
concern less than a month later he took
the unprecedented step of closing all
disney theme parks around the world in
florida the shutdown lasted from march
to july of 2020.
in california it lasted for 13 months in
the first fiscal quarter of 2022 chapic
reported 7.2 billion dollars in revenue
from disney parks experiences and
products boasting all-time high revenues
rick munarez a financial analyst said
that while posting that kind of profit
is helpful it's not the largest
indicator of how well the company is
doing overall since disney was the worst
performing stock of the dow 30 in 2021
mostly due to the fact that disney plus
under chapic's guidance isn't set to
turn a profit until at least 2024 at
best
which means he needs to squeeze every
penny out of every other part of the
company that he can in the meantime so
that he doesn't look even worse to
stockholders but the cuts and what some
fans perceive as unabashedly putting
profits over people
has led to discontentment among fans
reaching such a fever pitch that it's
extending far beyond the echo chamber of
disney blogs when you spend the most
amount of money you've ever spent and
you go and you have a substandard
experience worse than before
and this is multiplied by the fact that
it's so crowded
these are all things that kind of entice
this
extreme dissatisfaction theme park
expert scott smith told the washington
post earlier this year isn't it while
the theme park expert is a job chapic
though is in a unique position as far as
ceos of multi-billion dollar
corporations go disney is first and
foremost in the business of making money
but unlike almost every other giant
corporation it doesn't want to be seen
that way by the general public people
feel as though they have a personal
investment in disney because disney
markets itself as having a personal
investment in the happiness of its fans
by creating the idea that disney is a
safe place for people a place where they
will feel loved and supported the same
way that they do or
want to in their own homes they create a
higher standard of relationship between
the company and its customers that's why
disney doesn't use that term at all
rather customers are guests always but
it's also why because chapic has been so
transparent in his monetary motivations
and so apparently blind to guests
unhappiness so many of the people who
have bought into this idea feel like
he's letting them down and because fans
of the company are losing faith
so are many who work for the house of
mouse it's an odd situation for the
company to be in
over the last three decades disney has
only had two ceos one of whom oversaw
the disney animation renaissance and the
other oversaw disney becoming the
biggest media company in the world
enough goodwill among fans was built up
over those last three decades that many
people defaulted to let disney have it
they'll do it right anytime a particular
franchise was floundering and now people
are looking at disney with derision
so
what does all this have to do with the
owl house well
i just wanted to point out how big of a
tool bob chavic is his reluctance to
come out against the don't say gay bill
really rubbed me the wrong way but the
real reason i'm talking about him is
timing
you see the owl house first started
airing in january of 2020 and was
renewed for a second season before the
first episode even aired that's how much
faith disney had in the show and it was
well founded faith with the show
receiving widespread critical acclaim
multiple awards and shockingly solid
ratings with a saturday morning cartoon
especially in the age of just sitting
your kid down in front of netflix and
letting their brains melt the second
season premiered in june of 2021 but in
may of 2021 a month earlier disney
announced the cancellation of the show
giving it three 42-minute long episodes
to wrap everything up instead of a
proper full third season what was the
big difference at disney between january
of 2020 and may of 2021 well the ceo
went from being a guy who argued for gay
marriage legalization even threatening
to stop donations to the obama
re-election campaign in 2012 if the
president didn't come out in favor of it
to a guy who kept silent when the
florida government started passing
legislation that erased queer people
from classrooms that's quite a drastic
shift and where season one saw lose and
amity have an obvious crush on each
other
season two went right ahead and made
them a couple introduced a non-binary
former and likely current love interest
for eda and introduce hunter who many
believe is being set up for a gay
pairing with gus which is
a little problematic given the four-year
age gap but
hunter's a little bit
emotionally stunted from his lifelong
tenure in
the magical hitler youth boot camp and
gus only ever associates with older kids
so let's just say they're really good
friends
and maybe even roommates someday the
further queering of the show in season
two probably didn't sit well with a ceo
who openly cares more about profit than
people and sees queer characters as
tokens to never be confirmed and only
really exist when the golden goose known
as kevin feige says so so before season
two even got off the ground he clipped
its wings i know it hasn't been
confirmed that he was the one who made
the final decision but it reeks of him
so he's getting the blame and season two
is even better than season one with even
more critical praise and an increase in
the ratings as teenagers and even adults
started to find the show and fall in
love with its characters but that didn't
matter because it was already canceled
dead witch walking
because it didn't fit the brand
well what the hell is the disney brand
anyway
[Music]
time for me to use that marketing degree
simply put a brand as a promise to your
customer when describing a brand it's
tempting to simply list the attributes
of a business describe the product line
or point to the logo and tagline but a
brand is more than that it's a unique
benefit for your customers the walt
disney company presents itself as more
than just a business it is an authentic
american icon an honest-to-goodness rags
to riches story of one man who struck
out and made it big and did everything
he could to crush unions along the way
but the walt disney company's promise
has always been to be bringers of joy as
walt said we need to create joy not for
children but for the children in each of
us the brand identity of any brand
consists of the way the company
identifies itself through the products
or services sold and the image it
presents in the case of disney the
company is named after walt disney
proper name he even inspired the logo of
the company through his handwritten
signature which is part of the brand
identity of disney to this day there are
entire font families based on walt's
handwriting this direct connection to
its founder is also a part of the disney
brand as the walt disney company is one
of the very few corporations in the
world with a founder mythology now
disney is unique for a lot of reasons
but this one is kind of bonkers disney
has fostered a clear sense of identity
built just as much around walt disney
himself as it is the media it produces
other corporations and even studios tend
to lean away from using their own
founders as a mascot for various reasons
a person is singular and a person can be
fallible
but more importantly a person is boring
who stands for this company just a dude
okay people pack bond easier with a
mascot like tony the tiger walt disney
perpetuated a sense of personality to
the company it's easy to strip the
fursuit mascot away and realize that
it's just a sad old capitalist man
working for kellogg's but with disney
you push the cardboard cut out of mickey
mouse down and there's kindly mr disney
it's an extra layer of deception that
walt fostered in his own lifetime we
don't think about the founders of
corporations look at 20th century fox
before the merger fox studios was
founded by william fox both the g and m
of mgm were named for samuel goldwyn and
louis b mayer disney not only wants walt
disney to remain relevant in a modern
discussion of media but almost venerates
this man in a way few corporations do of
their founders the only companies i can
think of with a founder mythology are
like
apple but steve jobs notoriously gave
zero f words about how other people
perceived him very early on walt disney
established the production company as a
family brand family owned family
operated family safe a movie studio that
would produce films the whole family
could enjoy from the youngest children
to the oldest grandparents enchanting
young kids and bringing adults back to
their childhoods he's quoted as saying
you're dead if you aim only for the kids
adults are only kids grown up anyway one
could also say adults are just kids with
bank accounts disney offers multiple
promises to these families a disney
resort promises that you will enjoy your
time it's one of the most important
promises of its company a disney film
promises to be enjoyable by the whole
family without excluding anyone with
content wholly too mature for kids or
too juvenile for adults the disney
experience promises to be available to
everyone no matter how rich or poor if
you can't afford to take your kids to
the parks there's always the movies and
the disney company promises not to break
these aforementioned promises and in
doing so will allow you to build
memories to last a lifetime those are
the promises that the disney corporation
has been making to customers since the
1930s in the year 2000 an extra promise
was added disney promised to tell
stories for every child no matter where
they're from
what they believe or what color their
skin is enter the disney princesses
becoming the most diverse bunch of
skinny girls on a toy shelf but when you
ask a disney executive what their brand
is
they will simply say stories
old stories new stories fairy tales
myths legends parables and epics stories
for the whole family stories that
exemplify what is right and just whether
disney ever actually was as
all-inclusive and family-friendly as
they'd like to pretend is up for debate
the whiteness of the company's movies
didn't start to change until the 1990s
at which point the female characters of
color were universally fetishized
jasmine pocahontas esmeralda all women
of color all far less clothed than snow
white sleeping beauty bell or cinderella
so if disney's brand is family friendly
animated entertainment as well as
inclusivity i would imagine that the owl
house would fit their brand perfectly
it's got magic fun characters appeals to
kids and adults and as toyetic as all
hell
and yet
it didn't fit the brand
has their brand changed or
is it that the inclusivity part of their
brand was never meant to include girls
who kiss girls or boys who kiss boys or
people who don't identify as either
let's say for a moment
that
disney actually does love their queer
fans and the owl house really did just
not fit the disney brand because it has
changed
well
what the hell is the disney brand
today
[Music]
there's little you can do or say to
convince me that there was a rational
reason for the owl house's cancellation
good ratings good reviews are one thing
but the fact that the show attracted an
older audience is another thing entirely
and a citation for the program's
cancellation
was the older demographic it was
attracting the mindset is that if the
wrong age bracket was tuning into the
show
product lines directed at six to eleven
year olds would be less inclined to buy
ad space but there's nothing saying that
disney couldn't adapt and put the show
at a later time slot for more
appropriate consumer demographics
there's also nothing saying that the
executives wouldn't be aware that disney
plus was in late stage development and
realized that adult audience cartoons
tend to do well on streaming services
there's simply no reason why you don't
want an incredibly toyetic show directed
at an adult audience
who have an abundance of expendable
income there is after all a sub industry
at disney geared at marketing their
princesses for themed weddings and
funerals
yes funerals times like this make it
seem like the executive thought process
at disney is powered by a single gerbil
on a wheel but even in a quote-unquote
bad time slot the owl house got decent
ratings as it was
and in the end the rationale given to
terrace was that her show didn't fit the
disney brand which at first seems
self-apparent enough that it almost
makes sense and then you think about it
for more than two seconds and it's like
what brand because it's true there was a
very carefully crafted media environment
that was meticulously kept by walt
disney but that brand also carried on
after walt passed away even when the
company was nothing but the disney vault
and straight to video flops and cheap
sequels but today does it still carry as
much weight
now that disney has as many ips under
its belt as it does can we say that
everything fits into the brand does it
expand the brand in which world does the
disney brand include a they all die at
the end movie like rogue one allusions
to alcoholism in iron man 2 or in doctor
strange 2 with marvel's favorite mom
gone slasher monster not to mention the
wanton violence across either franchise
and the way that either franchise
struggles to fit into the disney brand
when they try to force it referencing
the book of boba fett in the titular
character's newfound no killing rule and
even today disney has left their
princess brand by the wayside for some
time the princess and the frog faced
upfront criticism over representation
and stunt voice casting
and took some time to find a fan base
tangled struggled to find an audience
and while frozen did have a massive
upfront success it did so while
distancing itself from the typical
princess formats to be a movie about two
estranged sisters healing a bond but to
make these kinds of features with these
kinds of messages ones which can appeal
to older audiences as well as the
targeted younger ones the studio has to
be willing to let narratives dive into
conflicts which are not strictly in line
with the media environment that walt
would have approved of and while the
company is still married to its archaic
image in order to keep up with the
modern mediascape there are a handful of
aforementioned instances where certain
medias rest uncomfortably
outside the strict parameters however as
disney adds so many exceptions to the
disney guidelines is the brand itself
becoming too vague the more disney
expands alters and permits free radicals
to perpetuate the modern disney culture
the more holes get poked into the brand
itself what exactly is the disney brand
today i see the collapse of the disney
brand beginning with the pirates of the
caribbean
yes it was inspired by a ride at disney
world disneyland the one in florida
however the film let itself go into
uncharted waters michael eisner then ceo
was sure that the film would be a
disaster the film had violence
alcoholism and a no small amount of
horror the stakes were real
and there was a palpable threat to the
main cast for the first time disney
produced a non-animated feature that was
able to reach cultural permians and it
worked with the pirates franchise
bringing in over 4.5 billion dollars and
if it worked once it would work again i
can argue that disney had two brands
their established brand and a developing
brand for their live action stuff one
which would dry in an older audience who
may scoff at new disney properties one
that was more adventurous daring and not
quite so safe and ever since then disney
has been moving its animated and
live-action media to more overlapping
spaces to the point where i suppose we
can say that the disney brand exists in
the same way that the british empire
exists
it's more of a concept that still
occupies a couple of its territories but
when referring to the british empire we
reference the thing that it was at its
peak so when bob chapic says that the
owl house doesn't have a place on the
network because of the disney brand
is he referring to the disney brand of
old or the disney brand of today
if the disney brand is the scapegoat for
why the owl house got thrown under the
bus
then i think it's interesting to examine
what about the owl house is so
incompatible because the owl house
honestly feels more like classic disney
than a lot of the other content that's
going up the only thing that is
particularly outstanding in this regard
is the comfort the show has in depicting
various gender expressions and
identities
namely the gay stuff the series did take
its time to build up the in your face
queerness strategically waiting until
viewers were too invested to really
hold it against the show and given the
strong ratings through the second season
when the queer stuff really began to
appear it's clear that most audiences
weren't uncomfortable with it either
[Music]
regardless of whether the final decision
came from bob chapic or not his job is
to make the company money and shepherd
the disney brand it's hard to cancel
something that's getting good ratings
but if you wanted it gone
he could simply cite the disney brand as
an excuse
the problem has just demonstrated the
disney brand is so threadbare these days
that it exists more in concept than in
practice and if the brand is so
tyrannical that it's costing the company
a franchise that earned one of the
highest accolades for writing excellence
while at the same time developing an
ever-growing dedicated fan base
maybe the brand isn't good for business
the only tangible excuse at the end of
the day is bigotry and if chapic is
letting bigotry lead his decision making
for the company even if he is using the
brand as a scapegoat he's just bad at
business especially after the florida
controversy over the don't say gay bill
disney lost whatever queer credibility
it had left queer audiences were some of
the most dedicated disney fans in the
world but with the company's reluctance
to recognize queer characters in their
media bleeding over into real life
we saw the consequences of queer erasure
spilling out into actual legislation if
there was any time for disney to put up
or shut up it was then during that one
week period when these laws were the
make or break point of being passed in
the southern states where disney
conducts enough of its business to sway
the politicians they endorse even leaks
at disney said the word was to remain
radio silent nothing was being planned
or prepared according to rumor by
mandate from chapic himself and when a
statement was released it was just the
normal power for the course statement
you'd expect and meanwhile
while this was going on disney
apparently
was developing a movie to be released
later this year strange world which
itself has an ensemble cast though the
central character
is a gay teenager
while on the surface we might say oh
finally after everything i am
considerably more cynical about disney
and their alleged gay representation and
this prompted me to consider how disney
could manifest a good relationship with
queer representation okay so
disney's put money behind the film to
push it through production
given the timing and how long animated
films take to make this was likely a
film approved by bob iger it seems funny
to me that not a single soul outside of
disney caught wind that this project was
happening until six months from release
when it comes to nearly any other disney
feature the press starts talking about
them years in advance disney has even
announced a movie so far ahead that they
even end up being canceled in
development remember gigantic it was
announced in 2015 for 2019 released but
was cancelled in 2017. so disney making
strange world alone isn't going to do
anything to sway my opinion disney will
need to release the movie in a way that
matches
how they would build up hype for
frozen or a live-action remake i have to
see that the studio wants people to see
this movie that the executives are
willing to stand behind it and prop it
up with other movies
that they're so proud of
unlike the owl house
which disney
not only did nothing to promote but has
not produced nor licensed a single piece
of tie-in merchandise where's my plush
king damn it what about hooty i'll host
lego sets probably better to support
etsy creators anyway but if disney
releases strange world quietly without
any marketing budget hoping that it will
be entirely forgotten
that will send a clear message that the
company has no ongoing interest in
promoting queer stories that they are
ashamed of queer stories and that they
see no value in queer stories the
queerness is something disney doesn't
even want to associate with but is only
willing to interact with insofar as it
gets the angry monkey off their back but
what will happen regardless
is the gay media hailing disney for
giving it to us even if disney corporate
acts like it would rather strange world
never existed and while disney cut the
check and threw it out there they're
doing nothing to ensure people
either know about it or watch it
disney's not actually giving us anything
they're dropping it and then
will blame us for not making it
successful and then using that lack of
success to justify queer identities as
box office poison it was always dana
terrace that gave us the owl house
i'm not willing to give disney the
credit when it was made abundantly clear
that the mouse didn't want anything to
do with it
[Music]
if you don't mind me being
really cynical for a minute what does it
really mean for a show like the owl
house to get cancelled this is a more
significant blow than you would think
because while other media may include
queer characters there can be problems
with this
the more benign manifestation of visible
queerness is characters whose queerness
is incidental and not indicative of the
plot this is evident in media i have
covered like the old guard which is
valid but visibility is all it
accomplishes alternatively you have
stories where the plot is built around
queerness like heartstopper and young
royals media has been built around
heterosexuality since
forever more annoyingly you have queer
characters who exist for a little more
than providing a presentation about the
validity of queerness itself which is
annoying
because it's not straight people who
need queer characters but the owl house
is this anomaly because while it
included incidental queerness it also
had something to say
about the state of queerness itself
the series used textual language to not
only afford a queer audience with
visibility
but use subtextual language to encode
themes and statements about the queer
community i got to read messages in a
piece of media that reflect my very
experiences of being queer i mentioned
above that the owl house does like to
take a stance on social conformity and
normative conditioning that being
the way a society enforces specific
values these collective values and the
people who embody and enforce them are
what we refer to as the hegemony for
those who are curious the hegemony
exists due to social tradition that
enforces certain elements of culture and
they are imparted on us from the day we
are conceived the language you speak the
fashion of the day social trends
technology biases and prejudices these
are all things that contribute but even
things like being
wrapped in a blue or pink blanket when
you're born being given toy trucks or
dolls on your first birthday are all
things people do to push you into
becoming what society expects you to be
for many people those roles are inert
and benign most people really don't mind
going along with these social
expectations and that's perfectly fine
for them the problem becomes and this is
where the queerness and the owl house
are concerned when social conformers
punish those who do not or cannot
conform to these hegemonistic values
this is where the just be yourself
messaging in the 90s came from in
children's programming following the
hyper-conformity of reagan's 1980s there
was a reactive push to encourage
children to manifest the person they
were rather than the person society
badgered them into being content like
this
rarely goes as far as the owl house does
to outline exactly what it means to be a
social outsider beyond getting bullied
by the popular kids or disappointing
your parents and the owl house kind of
gets it right
getting bullied kind of is the surface
level manifestation of being a social
outsider
but and queer people can especially
relate to this is far from the only way
that society has to badger you into neat
little boxes there's a much larger
systemic problem when it comes to
strictly enforced social standards from
a top-down authoritarian standpoint
society is easier to control when a
ruling party can limit life tracks that
are available to individuals because
they in turn can control the tracks in
the boiling isles there are nine paths
covens
with slight variations to accommodate
subgroups i can't really say our society
has many more if anything our society
has markedly less but then you realize
that the boiling isles themselves are an
escape from luz's life
where she's being forced into one of
these projected paths in the human realm
it's not a stretch to say that the
principal allegory of the show is louis
abandoning contemporary society in lieu
of a queer society
akin to a country kid moving to the big
city for college and then learning that
this magical queer world isn't
quite how why a literature makes it out
to be there isn't the social scape of a
bunch of disparate scrappy folks working
together to facilitate community values
there's fragmentation tribalism
internalized queer phobia and thrice as
many gatekeepers as there are
distinguishable identities lose faces
the same challenges the second she gets
to magic school she's forced into a
spell track that will determine what
school of magic she will study for the
rest of her life her friend willow
already demonstrated how difficult it
can be to change this track and by the
end of season 1 we discover that the
fate which awaits those who do not
conform
is imprisonment
in the conformatorium and that's only
for witches who passively avoid the
system for witches like eda who directly
challenge the establishment they await
public shame and execution
lose struggles with conformity she wants
the simple things by witch standards
however she is immediately faced with
criticism simply because humans lack the
anatomy to perform typical magic and
even though luz discovers how to study
magic through discovering four
combinable glyphs around the isles she
is constantly decried as a fake witch
it's a struggle for her to convince
classmates and grown-ups to take her
seriously many don't believe she has a
place in the boiling isles the place she
escaped to in order to reject conformity
and suddenly luz is in an escapist
environment which has the very trappings
of the conformist society from which she
fled
welcome to the queer community
[Music]
where we don't have covens we have flags
and it's remarkable that a community
that recognizes gender fluid as an
identity is so inflexible about their
thinking about a range of identities
these are just labels that describe who
you are at a given time they're not your
destiny having the same label all your
life is okay but there's also no rules
against taking them off and putting them
on at will people change
but because we are entering hegemonistic
spaces we need to fit into the boxes
that the hegemony likes to use to
classify everything that is outside the
norm it's like the only way we can get
accepted is if they get to ascribe neat
clinical titles to us like biologists
discovering a new species our acceptance
seems to be conditional on
classification and as with the owl house
if we can be classified then an
authority can control us and
unfortunately a prime example of this
latent process of conditioning
as it affects us
is present within the owl house
because while there are lesbian and
bisexual women depicted and even fluent
use if they them pronouns for an
incidentally non-binary character the
limited depiction of gay men uses
probably my least favorite trope
the gay dads
generally bothered by the gay dads trope
a secondary character not the main
character but a character whose parents
are significant enough that they could
be featured in an episode or two will
have two dads for parents
in this case loses best friend willow
which in itself is not a bad thing some
people have gay dads some people are gay
dads gay dads have spent a lot of the
last century fighting for the ability to
raise children but the problem becomes
when that's all we have as if that's the
only way executives are comfortable
depicting gay men at all i feel like
terrace herself has earned the benefit
of the doubt from me and that if there
were any gay boys for lose to be around
they were cut from the show from on high
but it's still disheartening to see that
willows fathers and the boys dancing at
grom are likely all we're going to get
the series does not have much longer to
wrap up a lot of loose ends and is
unlikely to introduce new characters in
relationship dynamics that are not
already in play especially gus and
hunter while displaying strong chemistry
together might be aged too far apart to
develop as anything other than good
friends or brotherly
but
why is this such a bad thing well
media's role in enforcing conformity is
to normalize various expressions it's
why representation in media is so
important the more people are confronted
with identities and ideas the more these
seem normal
normalization through repetition this is
part and partial of why there is such an
outcry for women's representation for
different kinds of women and especially
different kinds of bodies more diverse
representation opens up more venues of
perceivably valid self-expression it
helps if this is done in tandem with
real-world representation in order to
establish these identities as people
rather than just characters however it's
not a stretch to go from normalization
to enforcing conformative values through
repetition the more a kind of identity
is depicted in the same way the more
little baby queers and others begin to
internalize various expectations for
what their life should look like when
children's programming is only
interested in depicting gay men as
married fathers of a secondary character
this establishes the expectations that
the role of gay men in society is to
perpetuate these traditional homemaking
values and gay men kinda get that kind
of conditioning if this is you
then that's your truth to live but there
is a sense of badgering and shaming
other gays who openly choose to leave
grindr on their phone after they
graduate from college it's the same way
the closeted gays with corporate jobs in
the 80s would dismiss aids victims as
getting what was coming to them there is
very much a drive to pressure other gay
men to put on airs for the straights you
know to justify the validity of our
human rights and like the boiling isles
the queer community manifests covens of
our own here it's okay to be different
but not too different there it's okay to
be magic
but not too magic but bear in mind the
gatekeeping agenda of the boiling isles
was not enforced by natural magic users
emperor bellows was a human disguising
himself as a witch his control and
compartmentalization of magic was always
conducted with the objective of
eradicating witches
is that also a parallel for the world's
queer gatekeeping
we like the witches of the boiling isles
fear public scrutiny and violence
against us
there the imaginary threat of wild magic
is used to justify oppression and
violence even though wild magic never
seems to cause any harm to anyone is
that really any different from recent
debates about
kink at pride parades many within the
community blame regressive anti-queer
legislation and book bannings on
sex-positive sentiments that we display
so we attack ourselves
because some of us don't want to give
straight people a reason to harm us
regardless of the fact that many of
these talking points i.e i did not
consent to your kink
were used verbatim against trans people
in public
in the 80s and earlier and that
historically speaking the hateful
straits do not often need a reason to
use violence against us just like
bellows as a human pretending to be a
witch in order to hunt them the
sentiments of self-oppression and
gatekeeping in the queer community are
either derived from internalized phobias
or
reactions to violence threats
and regressive laws
if we live in fear of the heterohegemony
then the hegemony can still control us
and instead we develop these queer life
tracks
to rock the boat as little as possible
in the misguided belief that it will
give us more political clout to expand
our rights
because that's going swimmingly
apparently what comes to mind
is that observing the last century queer
rites hit their greatest strides
when community attitudes were more
radical
periods where we put on suits get
offices and follow the appropriate
channels are
when we make compromises and various
letters to the acronym get left behind
when critics call us groomers for even
existing shriveling up and molding
ourselves to be what they want isn't
going to advance our causes
just like democrats cowering at
republicans threatening to stage a
filibuster is just shows us that
democrats can be coerced and it's hard
to be taken seriously when history shows
that you back down from a fight at the
slightest sign of resistance
[Music]
thinking about it
disney could have used the owl house to
gain so much good will from the queer
community just as jay
goes off the rails and becomes a flaming
bigot here comes this new franchise
filled with witches and wizards and
queer acceptance and representation
around every corner it could have been a
replacement for all the people who felt
let down
by what she'd done and said disney could
have positioned it as the harry potter
for all those abandoned by she who must
not be named but they didn't
instead they killed it
they couldn't let it die because it was
thriving with a growing fan base instead
they killed it
they took this beautiful queer story
this house where us weirdos are accepted
and embraced and they tore it down and
we didn't say a thing about it
the fans did sure but the queer
community as a whole was just sort of
silent
we've been doing that a lot lately not
just us queers but a lot of people when
we need to be loudest we go quiet
we weren't always this way you know i
mean the queer community we used to rise
up and demand our rights and protections
look at the aids crisis in the 80s and
90s sure there were a painful amount of
gays and nice cushy jobs telling
everyone to just keep quiet and wait for
the cdc and fda to do their job to do
their research to spend a few years
maybe a decade running tests and trials
to find something that might help you
not die of hiv and aids just shut up and
wait but too many of us didn't have the
luxury of waiting
we were in crisis
we needed to help now and so act up was
formed
act up protested outside the new york
stock exchange the fda offices the cdc
offices inside of churches outside of
congress and even outside the homes of
anti-gay politicians its members were
arrested over and over again they were
demonized by straight society lambasted
by establishment gays the people with
power looked at them like buzzing flies
that needed to be zapped but in the end
they did get more funding for aids
research they did get new drugs into a
speedier pipeline than the decade-long
wait that fda trials could take
it was their activism
their fighting that helped turn hiv and
aids from a death sentence to a
condition
you can not only live with
but live a perfectly normal life with
that reminds me of the owl house to be
honest there's a lot of passive
resistance to emperor bellows in the owl
house people inside and outside his
sphere of power doing a little bit here
and there to shake up his rule but
nothing too major he's even convinced
multiple witches to join his side
promising them influence and power once
his plans come to fruition just like so
many queers bend the knee to
establishment power in real life for a
chance to get some power of their own
but just like in real life bellows
doesn't plan on ever giving them power
once he's finished they'll be dead and
he'll be all the more powerful for it
they're nothing but pawns in his great
chess match
when people followed the right track
they set out before them
they were stabbed in the back
just like the queer community gets
stabbed in the back
look at same-sex marriage we did
everything the right way
we took it through the courts and we won
but less than a decade later and it
looks like that same court with a few
different members
might just reverse that decision
even though we did as we were told and
followed the rules
at the end of season two eda and lilith
send king and lose away on what they
think will be a long wild goose chase of
a quest
so long that they will be spared from
what will happen when emperor belos's
plans reach their zenith and what will
eda and lilith do in the meantime
give up
what more can they do
and i'm worried that a lot of people of
my generation and those older than me
are in the same mindset right now
an activist conservative supreme court
is systemically removing rights from
people all over the country
but
other than some angry tweets and
a couple of peaceful protests i'm not
seeing a whole lot of pushback
are we exhausted
have we been fighting the good fight for
too long
have we given up
are we surrendering the battle while
shielding the next generation from it so
they can fight it later
maybe it's a rude awakening but the next
generation isn't being shielded or
protected
and they know they're a part of the
battle
every person with a uterus seeing the
supreme court deleting their bodily
autonomy every trans kid being kicked
off their sports team or out of the
bathroom every gay kid being outed by
homophobic teachers and queer kids in
general watching as their states again
and again take away their rights they
know the battle is happening
and just like luz and amity and gus and
willow and hunter they're not backing
down from the fight
they're fighting back against the
destruction of their special magical
world
passive resistance doesn't work
it's never worked it's always been a
band-aid we slap onto a gaping wound to
say we did our part
we say it's necessary
so that the systems will accept us into
the club that we can't kick up too much
of a stink or else they'll get mad at us
and not give us what we need
why do we expect to be given anything
we should be taking what we need not
just queer people but women and people
of color and disabled people and
everyone being crushed by the weight of
the overpowered minority of rich white
cisgender men that dictates
what rights we're allowed to have
we bend to their whims and do as they
say but becoming what they want us to be
doesn't advance our cause it just
advances theirs
so i think like king at the end of
season two of the owl house maybe we
need to introduce a little bit of chaos
into the system show them that their
control over us is an illusion they've
tricked themselves into believing
we've been beaten down pretty hard
before
by politicians and plagues
but we still fought back we still rose
up and we still won
and so how pathetic are the cishet power
players of the world that they couldn't
beat us at our worst
so go forth witches toppled the emperor
bellows of the world and conformity
i know we can do it
we're kind of magical like that
[Music]
[Applause]
so
[Music]
[Applause]
you